I feel incredibly lucky to be from a
country that's generally considered to
be the best place in the world to be a
woman in 1975 when I was seven years old
women in Iceland went on a strike they
did no work that day whether they held
professional jobs or had the work of the
home they marched into the center of
reykjavik 90% of women participated and
peacefully and in solidarity asked for
equality nothing worked in Iceland that
day because nothing works when women are
not at work five years later
Icelanders had the courage to be the
first country in the world to
democratically elect a woman as their
president I will never forget this day
that president victus as we know her by
her first name
stepped out on the balcony of her own
home a single mom with her daughter by
her side as he had won
this woman was an incredible role model
for me and everyone growing up at that
time including boys see frequently seers
the story of how a young boy approached
her after a couple of terms in office
and asked can boys really grow up to be
President
role models really matter but even with
such strong role models who I am so
grateful for when I was encouraged to
run for president my first reaction was
Who am I to run for president Who am I
to be President it turns out that women
are less likely to consider running than
men
so a study done in the u.s. in 2011
showed that 62% of men had considered
running for office but 45% of women
that's a gap of 16 percentage points and
it's the same cut that existed a decade
earlier and it really is a shame because
I am so convinced that the world is in
real need for women leaders and more
principled based leadership in general
so my decision to run ultimately came
down to the fact that I felt that I had
to do my bit even if I had no political
experience to step up and try to be part
of creating the world that will make
sense and be sustainable for our kids
and a world where we truly allow both
our boys and girls to be all they can be
and it was the journey of my life it was
amazing that you only started with
potentially as many as 20 candidates it
boiled down to nine candidates
qualifying and ultimately the race came
down
to four of us three men and me but
that's not all the drama yet you may
think you have drama in the US but I can
I can assure you we had our own drama in
Iceland
so our sitting president of 20 years
announced initially that he was not
going to run which is probably what gave
rise to so many candidates considering
running then later he changed his mind
when our prime minister resigned
following the infamous Panama papers
that implicated him and his family and
there was a popular protest in Iceland
so the sitting president thought he was
needed they needed a trusted leader a
few days later relations to his wife and
her family's companies were also
discovered in the Panama papers and so
he withdrew from the race again before
doing so he said he was doing that
because now there were two qualified men
who he felt could fill his shoes running
for office so on May 9th 45 days before
election day it was not looking too good
for me
I did not even make the graph in the
newspaper the polls had me at 1% but
that was still the highest at any woman
announcing her candidacy had earned so
it would be an understatement to say
that I had to work extremely hard to get
my seat at the table and access to
television because the network decided
that they would only include those with
2.5 percent or more in the polls in the
first TV debate I found out on the
afternoon of the first TV debate that I
would participate along with the three
men and I found out on live TV that I
came in at exactly 2.5% on the day of
the first DVD by
so challenges the foremost challenges I
had to face and overcome on this journey
had to do with media muscle and money
let's start with media there are those
who say gender doesn't matter when it
comes to media and politics I can't say
that I agree it proved harder for me to
both get access on airtime in media as a
matter of fact the leading candidate
appeared in broadcast media 87 times in
the months leading up to the elections
whereas I appeared 31 times and I am NOT
saying media has is doing this
consciously I think largely this has to
do with unconscious bias because in
media much like everywhere else we have
both conscious and unconscious bias and
we need to have the courage to talk
about it if we want to change it when I
finally got access to TV the first
question I got was are you going to quit
I am and that was a hard one but of
course with 1 percent to two and a half
percent in the polls maybe it's
understandable but media really matters
and every time I appeared on TV we saw
and experienced the rise in the polls so
I know firsthand how much this matter
and why we have to talk about it I was
the only one out of the final four
candidates that never got a front-page
interview I was sometimes left out of
the questions asked of all other
candidates and out of coverage about the
elections so I did face this but I will
say this to to compliment the Icelandic
media I got few if any comments about my
hair and pantsuit so kudos to them but
there is another experience that's very
important and I ran as an independent
candidate not with any political party
or muscle behind me that lack of
experience and lack of access to
resources probably came at a cost to our
campaign but it also allowed us to
innovate and do politics differently we
ran a positive campaign and it we
probably change the tone of the election
for others by doing that it may be the
reason why I had less airtime on TV
because I wanted to show other
contenders respect when access to media
proved to be so difficult to be ran our
own media
I ran live Facebook sessions where I
took questions from voters on anything
and responded on the spot and we put all
the questions I got on all the answers
on a open Facebook because we thought
you know transparency is important if
you want to establish trust and when
reaching young voters proved to be
challenging I became a snapchatter
I got young people to teach me how to do
that and I used every filter on chaps
not yet during the last part of the
campaign and I actually had to use a lot
of humour and humility as I was very bad
at it
but we grew their following amongst
young people by doing that so it's
possible to run a different type of
campaign but unfortunately one cannot
talk about politics without mentioning
money I'm sad that it is that way but
it's true and we had less financial
resources than the other candidates this
probably was partly due to the fact that
I think I had a harder time asking for
financial support and maybe I also had
the ambition to do more with less
some would call that very womanly of me
but even with one-third the media
one-third the financial resources and
only an entrepreneurial team but an
amazing team we managed to surprise
everyone
on election night when the first numbers
came in I surprised myself as you may
see in that photo
so the first numbers I came in neck to
neck - the leading candidate
well too early because I didn't try to
pull that but I came in second and we
went a long way from the 1% with nearly
a third of the vote and we beat the
polls by an unprecedented margin or 10
percentage points above what the last
poll came in at some people call me the
real winner of the election because of
this and there are many people who
encouraged me to run again but what
really makes me proud
is to know that I earned proportionately
higher percentage support from the young
people and a lot of people encouraged my
daughter to run in 2040 C is 13 and she
had never been on TV before and on
election day I observed her on TV
repeatedly and she was smart she was
self-confident she was sincere and she
was supportive of her mother this was
probably the highlight of my campaign
but there was another one
these are preschool girls out on a walk
and they found a poster of me on a bus
stop and they saw the need to kiss it
this picture was really enough of a win
for me what we see we can be so screw
fear and challenges it matters that
women run and it's time for women to run
for office be at the office of the CEO
or the office of the president I also
managed to put an impression on your
very own New Yorker I earned a new title
a living emoji of sincerity it is
possibly my proudest title yet and the
reason is that women too often get
penalized for using what I call their
emotional capital but I know from
experience that we become so good when
we do just that
and we need more of that we celebrate it
as we had won on election night because
that's how we felt so you don't
necessarily have to reach that office
you just have to go for it and you your
family your friends everyone working
with you if you do it well you will grow
beyond anything you will experience
before so we had a good time and I
learned a lot on this journey
probably more lessons than I can share
here and the time we have today but rest
assured it was hard work I lost a lot of
sleep during those months it took
resilience and perseverance to not quit
but I learned something that I knew
before on the one percent day and that
is that you can only be good when you
are truly authentically listening to
your own voice and working in alignment
with that as a good sister of mine
sometimes says you may cheat on your
intuition but your intuition never
cheats on you I think it's also very
important than you all know this that on
any journey you go on it's the team you
take along it's having people around you
who share your values your vision but
are different in every other way that's
the formula for success for me and I am
blessed with an amazing husband here
today an incredible family and great
friends and we came together as
entrepreneurs in the political arena and
pulled something of that everyone said
would be impossible as a matter of fact
the leading PR expert told me before I
made my decision that I would do well to
get 7% I appreciated his perspective
because he was probably right and he was
basing it on valuable experience but on
the one percent day I decided here to
show him that he was wrong
it's very important to mention this
because I did lose a lot of sleep and I
worked hard and so did the people with
me we can never go the distance if we
forget to take care of ourselves and
it's two things that I think are very
important in that in surrounding
yourself with people and practices that
nourish you but it's equally important
maybe even more important is to have the
courage to get rid of people and
practices that take away your energy
including the wonderful bloggers and
commentators I took a lot of support
from others in doing this and I made the
decision to go high when others went low
and that's partly how I kept my energy
going throughout all of this and when I
lost my energy for a moment and I did
from time to time it wasn't easy
I went back to why I decided to run and
how I had decided to run my own race I
called it a 4G campaign that he is
representing the Icelandic words and the
first one is called God
I ran to do good to be of service and I
wanted servant leadership to be at the
center of how I worked and everybody
else in the campaign second one is
clearly or joy I decided to enjoy the
journey
there was a lot to be taken out of the
journey no matter if the destination was
reached or not and I tried my utmost to
inspire others to do so as well
third is Garcia I was open to any
questions I kept no secrets and it was
all open on Facebook and websites
because I think if you're choosing your
president you deserve answers to your
questions last but not least I don't
need to explain that in this room we ran
on the principle of girl power
I am incredibly glad that I had the
courage to run to risk failure but
receive success on so many levels I
can't tell you that it was easy but I
can tell you and I think my entire team
will agree with me that it was worth it
thank you
oh what a great crowd hey I can't let
you go without saying that probably
everybody in the room is ready to move
to Iceland and better for you but of
course we've been probably can't vote
there but one thing we can get from
Iceland and I've always gotten his
inspiration
I mean I'm old enough to remember 1975
when all the Icelandic women walked out
and that really was a very big factor in
launching the women's movement you made
a reference to it earlier I'd love to
bring the picture back up and just have
us remember what it was like when a
country came to a standstill and then
what you may not know because our
American media did not report it the
Icelandic women walked out again on
Monday right yes then you tell us about
that yes so it 41 years after the
original strike we may be the best place
in the world to be a woman but our work
isn't done so at 2:38 on Monday women in
Iceland left work because that's when
they had earned the day's salary
it's to them what's really cool about
this is that young women and men
participated in greater numbers than
before because it is time that we close
that makeup so I'm not going to ask
Howard to commit right now to what she's
doing next but I will say that you'd
have a very large volunteer army should
you decide to do that again
thank you haha thank you all